docker/README.md, before:

# How to build COLMAP using Docker

## Requirements

- Host machine with at least one NVIDIA GPU/CUDA support and installed drivers
  (to support dense reconstruction).
- Docker (for CUDA support 19.03+).

## Quick Start

1. Check that Docker >=19.03 installed on your host machine:

    ```
    docker --version
    ```

2. Check that you have an NVIDIA driver installed on your host machine:

    ```
    nvidia-smi
    ```

3. Setup the nvidia-toolkit on your host machine:

    For Ubuntu host machines: `./setup-ubuntu.sh`
    For CentOS host machines: `./setup-centos.sh`

4. Run the *run* script, using the *full local path* to your preferred local
   working directory (a folder with your input files/images, etc.):

    ```
    ./run.sh /path/where/your/working/folder/is
    ```

    This will put you in a directory (inside the Docker container) mounted to
    the local path you specified. Now you can run COLMAP binaries on your own
    inputs like this:

    ```
    colmap automatic_reconstructor --image_path ./images --workspace_path .
    ```

5. Alternatively, you can run the *run-gui* script, which will start the graphical user interface of COLMAP:

    ```
    ./run-gui.sh /path/where/your/working/folder/is
    ```

## Build from Scratch

After completing steps 1-3, you can alternatively build the docker image from
scratch based on the **Dockerfile** (e.g., with your own modifications) using:

```
./build.sh
./run.sh /path/where/your/working/folder/is
```

## Troubleshooting

Install an NVIDIA driver and NVIDIA container runtime:

```
sudo apt install ubuntu-drivers-common
sudo ubuntu-drivers autoinstall
```

If you failed to install the above, check the appropriate NVIDIA driver by yourself and install it:

```
ubuntu-drivers devices
e.g.
sudo apt install nvidia-driver-455
```

Commit message:

Autoselect compatible nvidia for docker (#3454)
# Objective
Select compatible nvidia libraries automatically.
Select automatically in this order; Nvidia driver -> Nvidia container
toolkit -> Cuda -> nvidia container


# Original Problem and solution
## Problem
When I ran 
```
 ./run.sh ../dataset
```
I encountered below error; 
> docker: Error response from daemon: failed to create task for
container: failed to create shim task: OCI runtime create failed: runc
create failed: unable to start container process: error during container
init: error running prestart hook #0: exit status 1, stdout: , stderr:
Auto-detected mode as 'legacy'
nvidia-container-cli: requirement error: unsatisfied condition:
cuda>=12.9

## Cause
This is because I didn't install the proper Nvidia driver.

## Solution
But it is preferable that setup-ubuntu.sh automatically select
compatible drivers and Cuda version.


# Test
I confirmed all below procedure finished successfully using [South
building dataset](https://demuc.de/colmap/datasets/)
```
cd docker
./setup-ubuntu.sh
./build.sh
./run.sh ../dataset
colmap automatic_reconstructor --image_path ./images --workspace_path .
```

docker/README.md, after:

# How to build COLMAP using Docker

## Requirements

- Host machine with at least one NVIDIA GPU/CUDA support and installed drivers
  (to support dense reconstruction).
- Docker (for CUDA support 19.03+).

## Quick Start

1. Check that Docker >=19.03 installed on your host machine:

    ```
    docker --version
    ```

2. Setup the NVIDIA driver and nvidia-toolkit on your host machine:

    For Ubuntu host machines: `./setup-ubuntu.sh`
    For CentOS host machines: `./setup-centos.sh`

3. Run the *run* script, using the *full local path* to your preferred local
   working directory (a folder with your input files/images, etc.):

    ```
    ./run.sh /path/where/your/working/folder/is
    ```

    This will put you in a directory (inside the Docker container) mounted to
    the local path you specified. Now you can run COLMAP binaries on your own
    inputs like this:

    ```
    colmap automatic_reconstructor --image_path ./images --workspace_path .
    ```

3-b. Alternatively, you can run the *run-gui* script, which will start the graphical user interface of COLMAP:

    ```
    ./run-gui.sh /path/where/your/working/folder/is
    ```

## Build from Scratch

After completing steps 1-2, you can build the Docker image from scratch using the **Dockerfile**.
First, update the CUDA and Ubuntu versions in Dockerfile lines 1-2 to match your system, then:

```
./build.sh
./run.sh /path/where/your/working/folder/is
```

## Troubleshooting

Install an NVIDIA driver and NVIDIA container runtime:

```
sudo apt install ubuntu-drivers-common
sudo ubuntu-drivers autoinstall
```

If you failed to install the above, check the appropriate NVIDIA driver by yourself and install it:

```
ubuntu-drivers devices
e.g.
sudo apt install nvidia-driver-455
```
